A President of many words stays strangely silent on white supremacists

Washington (CNN)President Donald Trump rarely admits he's wrong -- but has the chance to belatedly condemn neo-Nazi protests at the White House Monday.

His failure to single out white supremacists after an opposing protester died on Saturday in Charlottesville, Virginia, sparked anger that crossed political lines.

The subsequent silence on the issue of a man who usually gushes a torrent of opinion and criticism led critics to question his political motivation and attitude at one of the first moments of national angst during his presidency.

But Trump has shown he loathes to appease critics so no one knows what he will say when he confronts reporters after signing a trade measure targeting China Monday afternoon.

"It's his call," a White House official said, reflecting the frustration among some of the President's top aides over his decision this weekend to blame the violence on "many sides."

The controversy reflected how a President's words at a time of trauma at home or crises abroad can shape or inflame tensions and capture the public mood.

The President also opted last week to deliberately escalate a showdown with North Korea over its nuclear program, again revealing the extent to which he rejects the ceremonial conventions of the presidency.

On Saturday, Trump did hit out at an "egregious display of hatred, bigotry and violence" after a woman died when a man with reported neo-Nazi sympathies allegedly rammed protesters opposing an alt-right gathering in Virginia with a car.

But his comment that the wrongdoing was on "many sides" appeared to draw an equivalency between counter protesters and the extreme right. Offered a second chance to condemn the extremist by reporters, he demurred. Sunday, a White House official, declining to be identified by name, said "of course" Trump's condemnation "includes white supremacists, KKK, neo-Nazi and all extremist groups."

t was the second time in a few days that the President's rhetoric and bearing had come under intense scrutiny. Last week, his warning that he would rain "fire and fury" over North Korea if it continued its threats, appeared to envisage a nuclear strike and triggered alarm in Asia and confusion about his motivations.

The results from last week: Criticism among Republicans and conservative commentators was more acute and unified than it has been throughout his presidency and last year's campaign.

Vice President Mike Pence and other White House officials defending Trump over his reaction to the Charlottesville incident and his comments on North Korea, as well as surprising remarks about a "military option" in Venezuela on Friday, had a common problem.

hey were called upon to explain, defend and often reshape the President's remarks after his rhetoric had crossed conventional lines.

Pence came to the President's defense during a news conference in Colombia on Sunday night, but was far more specific than his boss was the day before.

"We have no tolerance for hate and violence from white supremacists, neo-Nazis or the KKK," Pence said, calling them "dangerous fringe groups."
But Pence also came back to a familiar target -- the media -- blaming news coverage for criticism of his boss. "I will say I take issue with the fact that many in the national media spent more time criticizing the President's words than they did criticizing those who perpetrated the violence to begin with," Pence said.
